# Setting up matrix-registration (optional)

The playbook can install and configure [matrix-registration](https://github.com/ZerataX/matrix-registration) for you.

> matrix-registration is a simple python application to have a token based matrix registration.

Use matrix-registration to **create unique registration links**, which people can use to register on your Matrix server. It allows you to **keep your server's registration closed (private)**, but still allow certain people (these having a special link) to register a user account.

**matrix-registration** provides 2 things:

- **an API for creating registration tokens** (unique registration links). This API can be used via `curl` or via the playbook (see [Usage](#usage) below)

- **a user registration page**, where people can use these registration tokens. By default, exposed at `https://matrix.DOMAIN/matrix-registration`


## Installing

Adjust your playbook configuration (your `inventory/host_vars/matrix.DOMAIN/vars.yml` file):

```yaml
matrix_registration_enabled: true

# Generate a strong secret using: `pwgen -s 64 1`.
matrix_registration_admin_secret: "ENTER_SOME_SECRET_HERE"
```

Then, run the [installation](installing.md) command again:

```
ansible-playbook -i inventory/hosts setup.yml --tags=setup-all,start
```


## Usage

**matrix-registration** gets exposed at `https://matrix.DOMAIN/matrix-registration`

It provides various [APIs](https://github.com/ZerataX/matrix-registration/wiki/api) - for creating registration tokens, listing tokens, disabling tokens, etc. To make use of all of its capabilities, consider using `curl`.

We make the most common APIs easy to use via the playbook (see below).


### Creating registration tokens

To **create a new user registration token (link)**, use this command:

```bash
ansible-playbook -i inventory/hosts setup.yml \
--tags=generate-matrix-registration-token \
--extra-vars="one_time=yes ex_date=2021-12-31"
```

The above command creates and returns a **one-time use** token, which **expires** on the 31st of December 2021.
Adjust the `one_time` and `ex_date` variables as you see fit.

Share the unique registration link (generated by the command above) with users to let them register on your Matrix server.


### Listing registration tokens

To **list the existing user registration tokens**, use this command:

```bash
ansible-playbook -i inventory/hosts setup.yml \
--tags=list-matrix-registration-tokens
```
